Okay, so you were... So we were in the Admiralty
Islands, and the 1st Cavalry had just recently
cleaned it up. We had a large naval base there. And
from there we prepared one of our companies,
Company B, I believe, to carry the 1st Cavalry in.
So
you were preparing then to go into Leyte? Right.
The invasion of the Philippines. Right, we got
them ready. And you were basically under Douglas
MacArthur then? Yes, we were a separate
battalion, an orphan. Really, we were under
General Kruger, Sixth Army.
So we then, from there, the rest of the battalion
shipped to Atape, New Guinea. And see, each
division had an amphibious kit, which was
composed of a few amphibious tractors. And then
the rest of the battalion
took over those amphibious kits in the 43rd
Division. which was National Guard Division from
Maine to
Vermont.
And we trained their people and ours for invasion,
and they got
in government. Was that invasion the first action
that you saw, or were you still trained? It was the
first formal action. I'd seen informal action.
What do you mean, that bomb? Well, there was a few
stray Japs still. You don't kill them all at one
time and stuff like that, but it was very minor
stuff. And then we carried the... So you were in on
the L.A.T. Gulf? No, I was not in on the L.A.T. Gulf.
This one company was. The rest of the battalion
carried the 43rd Division in on the Lingayen Gulf.
which was a larger operation. We carried the 4030
and I was naval liaison for that. So were you on a
ship then offshore? Yes, the regimental
commander of the attacking regiment and myself
about 2 30 in the morning went aboard a subchaser
and by then this LCI, landing craft infantry. Are
you familiar with those? Small ships. But they
mounted rockets on decks. And he and I went into
1500 yards and marked the line of departure. We
were in the LCVP. And then the rocket ships came in
and fired their rockets. And then we marked the
line of departure for the amphibious tractor
waves, which there were just several battalions
of amphibious tractors, all those troops coming
in. And as soon as the second wave passed, then he
and I went ashore. And then I immediately started
to dash across the beach and immediately started
pulling people together. You break down in small
units, and you try to get them back up.
See, by then, the
Japanese had begun to pull back and let you land,
and then try to knock you off the beach. And that's
basically what they tried to do there. In some
areas.
As we compared in later notes, and I prefer this to
be off the record,
when the first Cavs got out of their vehicles, they
just got in like hunters and started out. 43rd got
out. It took about 30 minutes to get them up off the
ground. But some of them see our way.
I'm not sure.
Training perhaps.
But anyway, they misused some of our M50s tractors
because they're primarily beach vehicles. They
have maybe half an inch of armor across the front.
Not very much. They carried some of them down the
road acting as tanks. We had a .35 caliber machine
gun each one. And they got some boresighted holes
from 37 millimeter Jap guns and stuck others in
rice paddies and stuff like that. Not in every
case, but.
And as the XO, down as the XO, were you in a command
post then? Yes. Or were you off in the field? You
were right behind the lines, probably. At that
time, I was hiding behind a sand dune and trying to
get control,
because we had very little control until things
began to move in, because we had several waves of
people running in.
And I was neither afraid,
scared, excited, or nervous. All of them rolled up
into one. You can condition a man's mind.
So in other words, you felt that the training was
very beneficial. Oh, definitely. And an
interesting thing,
there wasn't a, See, there was been a heavy
preliminary bombardment by the Navy. I don't
believe there was a square foot of beach if there
wasn't some shell breakage.
Although I'm sure they did very little damage to
the Japanese who had pulled back.
But the Kamikaze is popular. Tell me about
Kamikaze. Well, we had some 500 ships that we got in
harbor.
And one
of them, unfortunately, buried himself in the
hold of a freighter, which carried our beer and
ration. So did the freighter sink? I assume it did.
But I think it was a Black Widow, I believe
it was a P-61 Black Widow,
almost like a P-51 night fighter. It came over from
the ocean. And none of us had ever been
indoctrinated with a Black Widow. And the whole
fleet opened
up, freighters and all, and there was all kind of
flak falling on us. We were crawling under coconut
logs. And just as he got to the horizon, he got a
fuselage burst. And
he went. And of course, we were harassed by
Japanese fighters, not necessarily kamikazes.
Did the Japanese have any artillery to shoot at
that time? Yes, they had captured an 11-inch
crack mounted gun, and they had it around the bay up
in the mountain. And we referred to him as Piscol
Charlie, because about 11 o'clock at night,
they'd run it out. The adjutant and I had a foxhole
that was about four feet square with sandbags
around, real comfortable. In an Amtrak, you can
carry an awful lot of equipment, including a cot
and sponsors. So we had rather developed
foxholes. And we'd stand there in our underwear
and boots and helmet. And around the bay, we could
see a flash. And we could count 21 seconds and duck
down, and we'd get simultaneously the sound of the
muzzle burst, the whine, and the explosion. One,
two, three. And And I'd say, Bill, how far away do
you think that was? About a mile? Well, I'm afraid
it's closer than that. I said, half a mile? I'm
afraid it's closer than that. All right, 300
yards. Yeah. How'd they knock that gun off?
My classmate and very close friend by the name of
Taylor, who was a company commander in the first
camp, See, the first cab finally came on in.
And we were visiting after the war up here, and he
turned around. I tell him about the piss call.
Charlie turned around his wife, Topsy, and said,
you hear what the man's saying? See, we had a
battalion of 155 guns. Every time he'd fire,
they'd fire a battalion salvo. But a gun is too flat
a detector.
And Taylor said, you hear what the man's saying?
That I and my company had to take him by hand. So
that's how they got him? They had to send the
company up there? That was the first cab. Of
course, there was a lot of Aggies in the first cab.
Yeah. See, it was a square regiment still, even
though we'd gone to Triangle Division. I mean,
Square Division.
Even though we'd gone to Triangle Division. Which
I don't know whether that means anything to you or
not. No. Well, before World War II, all our
divisions were square. That was...
four
battalions each. And then they found out that the
Triangle Division, which was three battalions
each, was more flexible. Except in the armor,
which all of the modern divisions have gone to, in
the armor, to start out with, we had Combat Command
A, Combat Command B, and the Reserve Command. And
all they consisted of was the headquarters and
headquarters companies. And then they had so many
tank battalions, so many infantry battalions,
and they attached to them the combat command for
each individual operation they tailored them.
Because if it were a heavily wooded country, not
particularly suitable for tanks who were heavy on
infantry, And the rest of the Army adopted it after
the war. But prior to the war, I mean, during the
war, they were trying to division. The troops were
not attached to that regiment. They were a part of
it, you see. Did you have any Filipinos with you,
fighting alongside you? Not initially. But then
it became our job to train the Philippine
guerrillas.
Poor job. Tough job. Can you describe it? Well,
among other things, there were pockets of
Japanese, including Japanese Marines. Unusual
for a Japanese race when you had to be six feet tall
to be a Marine. So we trained guerrillas the best we
could to clean
out those pockets.
And they were strange people. One night, we were
loading up some to go out. And as he got in the truck,
he handed them a rifle. But this one said, but, sir,
I did not join the Army to fight. I joined the Army to
play in the land. They
could be tough in certain situations,
but they
were not that well trained as a whole. It takes a
long time to train that long. And they'd issue rice
rations. They'd walk 10 miles back and say, the
bowl's cracked.
They just weren't very well trained. That was one
of the major problems. Well, that was a problem.
I'd say their temperament and so forth. They're
not the world's greatest fighters in organized
combat. Individuals,
they might be. So we trained guerrillas to clean
out those pockets, and I think finally cleaned
most of them out. And they did or we did? Who cleaned
most of them out? Both of us. They cleaned out a few.
We cleaned out most of them. See, part of the thing
had to swing up toward Baguio, if you ever heard of
Baguio or not, but that was beautiful in the
mountains. Not too long after that, I left the unit
and went up as assistant G4, 1st
Corps Headquarters. So I wasn't doing much
fighting things. an awful lot of hard work.
Now when was that? I don't know the date.
Is this when you were promoted to major? No, I was
promoted to major in 1942. Okay, so was this— Well,
I was already— Okay, so you were a major at this
time. Yeah. And I went up to
System G4 by Corps. And
we had
a full colonel by the name of Tommy Sawyer. He was
G4. He had been quartermaster.
And when he became G4, there was a short, fat,
27-year-old captain from Texas
A&M
assistant
corps quartermaster. The best they could do in
promoting a major, he was a whiz. He was a whiz. I
can't remember the name now. But he was sharp. You
don't become assistant corps quartermaster
unless you're sharp. I don't know if you're
familiar with what a corps is, but it's strictly a
tactical avenue. We don't have any supply
functions. Divisions have it. Army has it. But not
corps. We're tactical. But
I guess I was assistant G4 in charge of
transportation and shipping. And I worked up
there. See, then we would start planning the
invasion of the Philippines. Were you in Manila at
this time? Was that the headquarters? No, I was
down in Rosales. I'd been to Manila. It was my
sister outfit. I fought all the way through
the whole thing. And did you start some of the
planning? We had an operation called Operation
Blacklist,
which was the invasion of Japan. The main island is
Cayuse,
and this was a smaller island, Huntsville.
And our plan was, it was cut by a river across it. The
plan was two divisions here, one division here, a
division in the regimental combat team in the
floating reserve. What my job was as assistant G4,
in the past, as divisions landed, they set up their
dumps on the beach, ammunition dumps,
quartermaster dumps, and so on and so forth. And
then when they got too far inland and the Army came
in, and the Army took them over, not Corps. That
wasn't our function.
And then the Army would not like exactly where they
were, so it would be a big moving around this,
moving around that. So my job in that was to, using
aerial photographs, was to coordinate with Army
above and divisions below so that we could
mutually agree on the initial location of those
dumps so Army could build on them without having to
move. And then we were also getting our troop
assignments. And
I'd complain to Army G-4. I said, man, you switch
these things around. He said, what are you
complaining about? He said, we've already
handled eight of them before we ever signed you
one. Because they'd signed the 355th Engineer
Firefighting Detachment. Two days later, it was
transferred somewhere else. And then, an
interesting thing, General N.S.P. Bull Swift was
our corps commander and had come from the 1st Cav.
earlier. And some Air Corps generals were trying
to bet him $1,500,000 to warrant me over.
And see, I was working from 8.30 in the morning
until noon, and went and took a nap. And went to work
about 2 and worked until about 5, and had a drink and
supper, and then come back and worked about 7 or
3.30 in the morning, seven days a week. And they
were trying to bet that money that the war bill was,
they knew about the atomic bomb, we didn't. And
then suddenly
VJ Day came. And that was about 5 o'clock in the
afternoon when I found out about it. So I went to the
officer's bunk and had a couple of drinks and then
came back to work from invading Japan to the
occupation of Japan. Then they split I-Corps into
two groups, I-Corps Forward and I-Corps Rear. And
they left Brigadier General James F. Collins, who
was the Corps Artillery Commander, as Commander
General High Court Rear, and left me back as G4 High
Court Rear. And I have never worked with a minor
person in my life. He was my ideal of a West Pointer.
About six feet, two inches tall, handsome,
slender, blue eyed, deep voice.
And one of the finest persons I've ever worked with
in my life. Anything I wanted, I was the one to see.
Operations weren't doing anything. First place,
I had to ship troops to Japan. I ended up shipping
85,000 troops
to Japan. And all of the problems. First place, we
had two ports, Nagoya and another
port. And I had to decide which one going in there
and which one going in there. I had to depend on the
Navy for bottoms to ship them in, APAs, AKAs, LCTs,
LSTs. had to supervise all the landing
operations. We had 22 beach points.
Down on the beach, we had an engineer at Bolton
Shore, West Point, a colonel in charge of it. And I
went down there to him, and I said, Colonel, I'm the
G4 I Corps Rear. I don't know what the hell I'm
doing. I need some help. He said, what do you need? I
said, well, could I get a road down here? He said,
damn right. I said, Major, put him a road just like
he wants. And I said, we're going to be doing
24-hour operations. Is it possible to get some
lighting? He said, yeah. I told another guy,
whatever I want to do. because i went down and told
him i needed help and
we loaded sometimes 24 hours a day sometimes not 24
hours a day it depended for how many months i'd
guess 45 days
see our we had these beach ones that lsts could come
up We had to lighter things out to APA and AKAs. I
don't know if you know the APA and the AKAs, the
LSTs, but we always had some of these beach points
knocked out because of sand building up.
Sometimes we had two high tides today, so we'd
bring in a ship on a high tide and take them back out
on
the next up tide. And we could do two, sometimes
during periods, and sometimes only one,
depending on tides. So we were pretty well 24-hour
operation. But see, you'd plan all these things. I
had a
quarter-master loading transport
team. And Lieutenant Colonel in charge, he was
senior to me. This gives you an idea of General
Collins. because I had laid out all the troop areas
and so forth. Then I found out that these troops
were coming to the beach with no means of feeding
themselves. So I had to go back to that in their boat
and shore regiment colonel and ask him for help in
setting up the kitchen. We were feeding 1,000,
1,500 people a week. And I took John Collins down
there one day, a long, tall, lanky nigger with his
hat on sideways, a big Adam's apple. He was a mess
guard. And
I said, what's that dump out there right back
there? He said, sir, I can't get garbage,
something to drain down there. I had them build it
up this way. He showed us over it. He showed us his.
where he kept his ration. You know, Filipinos are
going to eat this. This is guarded 24 hours a day.
General liked it, and so he died, because that guy
knew what he was doing. But see, these two ports in
Japan, nobody told me that one of them was closed
because of mines. All of them were going to one
place. So you thought you were shipping the troops
to two different places, but actually you're only
shipping them to one. And I couldn't depend on my
plans on APA or AKS because, you know, the final
authority is the captain of that ship. He may
decide that his ship's not seaworthy and put a
deck. Hi, Mama. I want you to meet Dr. Anderson.
This is my wife, Jo. Nice to meet you. But he might
decide that his ship's not seaworthy, and he had a
great big hold I was going to put trucks in. He might
weld a bulkhead right down the middle, and I could
put jeeps
in. So this quartermaster loading transport team
would go aboard and check. And I was walking by one
night, and a gentleman called and said, come here.
I said, what?
And he said, there's been a lot of misinformation
about what was out here. He said, I want it stopped.
He said, you want to tell that Lieutenant Colonel
or you want me to? I said, I'll be glad to tell him.
The only thing is, tell me who's running it. He
said, by God, you are. He worked for a guy like that.
When did you first get to Japan? When they sent you
over there? On the last ship. September,
I think. What were the conditions like? In Japan?
Yeah. Well, defeated country. I was stationed in
Osaka. Osaka.
And firebombed almost left me. Not all of it, but a
great portion of it, known as Pittsburgh. I'd like
to go back to the Philippines for a minute. Part of
my orders were that each soldier would be equipped
with a farm-fitting bedroll. And I had the 6th
Division sitting down here by a beach. by some
loaded dogs, and I went up to the general, and I
said, General, if we get them shipped out all set,
the dog could sure would help us. He said, call a
meeting up there with them. I said, yes, sir. On the
way up, he said, you tell them what you want. I said,
I'm a general. They'll look at me out of this thing
and shake my head like that. So we made a ring,
shipped them across the dock, and got rid of them.
And then 10 days later, they transferred them out
of our command to somebody else's command. But I
had to furnish everybody one of those
farm-fitting things. So I had borne 10,000 from
this division, getting 5,000 from Manila. Nobody
neglected to tell me that when they got to Japan,
they were taken away from them. Because that
clothes-fitting thing was causing upper
respiratory infection. Nobody ever told me that.
The other thing. All my female personnel, which
were nurses and a few Red Crossers, the only way I
could carry them to the beach was in the ambulance.
So nobody could see. Rape was going on when the
other right hand left. And I had a group of them. I
was going to ship on an APA personnel.
Quartermaster Lowry. Was it Filipinos then, or
were rapes Americans, or Americans, or
everybody? Blacks. blacks. In fact, in the south
of the city, the only way you could take
out a female personnel on a date was two couples and
both of the males would be on it. They hung nine
minutes of play. I'd rather not have that.
They assault and
rape
the nurse and kill the male escort. And then did
they have a court-martial? I wasn't in New Guinea
at the time. Anyway, that's why the order came
down. But then my quartermaster's little
transport team came by, told me there was only one
set of heads on that APA. Well, you can't have
female personnel using the same set of heads. So I
called 6th Army in Manila. I said, how about
shipping them by air?
And he said, well, I'll tell you what I'll do.
belong to hospital nurses, which had come in from
Marseille, France, incidentally. He said, I've
got some extra nurses in Japan. He said, I'll
transfer these out, and when they get there, I'll
transfer some more in. I said, boy, you've got to
deal. We weren't very close to that stuff. Those
were the kind of problems. I had a telephone by my
bed all night, and it rang a lot of times. But
General Collins, he'd come over and he'd say, come
on, let's go down and eat. He'd say, oh, General
so-and-so, he's a Jew, but he sure slacks ham. He'd
say, well, go down and eat with him. And boy, he was a
fine guy to work with. And he got me out of trouble in
Japan.
I was out. I had an Aggie muster.
And I had it in the hotel. A couple of Aggies got out
in front of me. I had a flat on their Jeep. They were
pretty drunk. They were cussing. Raising a pail
coming right up. Pilling swifts on the road. So
next morning my chief of section, Tommy Sawyer,
said, don't worry, chief of staff won't see you
until 8.30.
And I said, what about it? He said, last night. He
said, now just go in and keep your mouth shut. He
said, if he restricts you to quarters for 30 days or
something, I'll go to bat for you. I said, restrict
me to quarters? I'm supposed to go home in two
weeks. He said, you may not. So I went in to General
Murray, and he said, your boys raised hell last
night. Yes,
sir. The general told me to do something about it.
Yes, sir. He said, next time, take them out the back
door. Yes, sir. I went back, Tommy saw you, and I
said, everything's okay. He said, you can thank
General Collins for that. He came up at breakfast.
He told Murray to do something about it. The
colleagues had him by the arm. What happened to
Collins?
He became a commanding general for Pacific
Command. I
don't know whether he's in the book or not. Have you
ever seen the book? Mama, where's my book? I get
this every year, a
roster of retired Army general officers. And then
in the front, they ice against it. Well, I don't
know where it is. I think it's down here, too.
They're kind enough to put in the list of the active
officers by how they rank. It's always
interesting
to hear it, to me. General of the Army. Brad Lamb.
Well, he's a general of the Army that retires. But
see, they list them on their rank. And then this is a
retired guy.
Let's see what Collins is. He became a director of
the American Red Cross at one time.
Here
he is, James F. He lives at 4133 North River Street,
Arlington,
Virginia. What I used to like when he was a
brigadier, we'd be riding this old Aussie Army
sedan with no rear shocks on it, bouncing along.
pull out his paycheck. He said, sure it's going to
be tough when he busts me back to a major after the
war.
Was there a lot of fear that people would lose a lot
of grade as soon as the war was over? All the
brigadiers went back. See, during World War II,
Terry Every promotion was AUS, Army of the United
States, which was temporary. Yeah, temporary
promotion. Right. Now, the brigadiers went back.
In fact, one that had been a brigadier became a
commandant out of the A&M. He's a good friend of
mine. He's a colonel. Most of them got back to the
general officer.
See, in this,
in right here,
in this book here,
there are
diamonds. And
those plus there, which... What does that stand
for? It stands for A-B-S. And here's F-D-N-E. Just
to get
an idea of how many generals they have in the Army.
Yeah, and who they are. Get an idea of what their
relative rank
is. So it's interesting to look through it.
I see people I've served with in various
capacities.
But anyway, in Japan, my primary job there, I got
there, was
the
Corps
had been modified so many times that it was
Amendment Slank 21-6 to Amendment 10, where it got
down to a poor company commander could never tell
what was latest information. So that was one of my
principal jobs was to completely revise it and
bring it up to date, which I did and then carried up
to Army for approval, and they said, well, just
follows ours, and I said, that's what it's
supposed to do. Our order's supposed to be based on
ours. And, of course, it got wise on certain
things. Some of the troops or divisions would call
in and say they have seized the submarine dock.
What'd I do with it? I'd call Army. They'd say,
seize, hold, and guard pending further
notifications. So I quit calling them. I just tell
our group the same thing. And it took me two or two
and a half months
hard work. When did you leave your parents?
Approximately December 1, 1946. 45.
45, yes. Sorry
about that. Did you have any relations with the
Japanese people at all? Oh, not much. A little bit.
How'd they behave? Hmm? How'd they behave? Oh,
fine.
Our quarters were in the new Osaka Hotel, which was
a seven-story hotel modeled on one in Cleveland
that was in Osaka. And we had it pretty deluxe. They
had taken out steam heaters and wore them, but they
put them back. And we had
a house ball on every floor. People would come in
and turn your bed down at night. And we had a, see,
they
broke people. See, a major is a field officer, but
they broke it down in the Corps as colonel and above
and other officers. So I ate with the peons down on
the ring. Lobby had a printed menu. It was
beautiful. Of course, it was GI food or GI-traded
potatoes. It sure sounded good. Then they had a
mezzanine dining room for you to take visitors.
And on the fifth floor, we had a big, huge bar. It was
luxurious quarters there. So you were treated
really well? Yeah. The army just complicated it.
Sure, right. Were you eager to get home in December
of 45? Was I eager to get home? Did you ever consider
staying in? At
one time,
they had a deal that you could go regular army as
second lieutenant. Oh, really? This was after the
war? No, it was during the war. You could go regular
army as a second lieutenant? I mean, they would
promote you up,
you know.
He might forget about you by the first lieutenant
or something. He'll be starting all over again.
And I was tired. I had worked hard and seen enough
killing. I'll guarantee you I didn't want to go on
an invasion of Japan lately. Tommy Sawyer told me,
Come on, Japan, and stay another year. I said, I'll
promote you to a lieutenant colonel. And I said,
Colonel, if it delays me by so much as one day, I'm
not interested. I was tired and nervous. I'd be
fought.
In those areas, your life's on the line all the
time. I slept with a pistol in my pillow at night.
I've been shot at and bombed at. Even as late as 50, I
built a house out in North Oakwood.
And I'd walk outside and say, gosh, what a
beautiful night. And then suddenly the
cockaneers see if I can hear a plane coming. And we
had a little breakfast with a window in it.
Absolutely would not have seen that in the night
with the light on without the blinds on. Just, your
neck crawls. One of those picks to take a pot shot at
you. It's, uh, and my service was a whole lot less
rough than a lot of others. So you were eager to get
back to the civilian life, huh? I was eager to get
back to the States. At that time I was tired and worn
out and We had people been over there three years,
and they were just walking ghosts.
The conditions, the adamant that you took from
malaria and all of that, boy, just, they're
hard. Were you going to get back in the automobile
business? Were those your plans? Yeah. Well, see,
I had to be. Yeah. My dad ran during the war. Of
course, couldn't get any cars. We just let him take
it over. My partner worked for the quartermaster
out at
the base. We let my dad take it over, and just
whatever he made on repairs and parking,
he kept. He owned the building. He paid himself
rent.
But I was tired. I
was tired of, you know, being in a position to
think.